JUDY WOODRUFF: Now we turn
to the grinding civil war in
Yemen, which has also become
a proxy conflict
between neighboring
Saudi Arabia and Iran.
A two-and-a-half-year bombing
campaign has killed thousands.
Vast swathes of the
country lie devastated.
Compounding the horror, Yemen
is on the brink of famine.
There are critical shortages
of aid and medical care,
and now an outbreak of
cholera is spreading.
The country has been essentially
closed to journalists for
months, but filmmaker Martin
Smith and his team from
"Frontline" were able to
gain access to Yemen in May.
"Frontline" has a short
film on its Web site
documenting what they saw.
Here is an excerpt, beginning
in the capital, Sanaa.
MARTIN SMITH: It's not just
the jets you hear overhead, or
the buildings that are bombed,
or the airport
that's demolished.
It's the knock-on effects of
the war on infrastructure.
When we came into town,
what struck me right
away was the amount of
garbage on the streets.
The garbage workers hadn't
been paid in eight months.
The rains came, washing through
the garbage, bacteria carried
into the water supply, people
drinking bad water.
And they were hit by
a cholera epidemic.
Cholera simply dehydrates you
quickly, so that anything you
ingest, any water you drink
or food you eat just completely
passes through your system,
and you get no nutrients out
of it.
WOMAN: She is very tired
because of the exhaustion
from the electrolyte
imbalance that she has.
She can't control herself now
until she gets enough fluid.
MARTIN SMITH: The World Health
Organization is saying that
there are over 300,000 cases
of cholera; 1,600 people have
died, many of them children.
And the numbers keep going up.
The hospital we visited, they
were already beyond capacity.
The nurses and doctors were
suffering from a lack of
medicines and equipment.
And they were there working,
in spite the fact that
they hadn't been paid.
WOMAN: We don't get salary.
Last salary I got was
in September only.
If I will not work,
then they will die.
And maybe tomorrow, I will
be sick, and nobody will
see me because of no salary.
MARTIN SMITH: People
often ask why the Saudis
are bombing Yemen.
It's a question for the Saudis.
They will tell you they're
fighting against the rebel
group that's trying to take over
the country, who are backed
by their archrival, Iran.
Yet, in the time I was there,
it was hard to see really
what the Iranians were doing.
But the impact of the
Saudi-led coalition
bombing was very clear.
Parts of the country
have been isolated of
bomb strikes on bridges.
People on the ground
in Yemen are suffering.
They're caught in the
crossfire of this war.
In Hajjah, we went
to a hospital.
And I met a nurse there who
showed me pictures she'd taken
a day or two before of a young
boy who came in severely
malnourished, and died.
WOMAN (through translator):
Of course one gets very upset.
All of us here do.
We do our job, and
we love the child.
And, in the end, they pass away.
It's hard.
MARTIN SMITH: She then was
called away to go take care
of a new severe malnutrition
patient.
A mother came in with her child.
It was a little girl named
Aline, a seventh-month-old baby.
WOMAN (through translator):
For sure, it's a
consequence of the war.
The war is behind
the malnourishment.
And it is only getting worse.
The cases have increased.
There is a food shortage.
How are your living
conditions at home?
WOMAN (through
translator): Terrible.
MARTIN SMITH: There were always
malnutrition cases in Yemen,
but the nurse told us that
the number of cases had
more than doubled since
the war.
And maybe an hour later,
another mother came
in with her daughter.
Ruqayah her name.
It was a 5-year-old girl.
Ruqayah had come from
an IDP, an internally
displaced persons camp.
And it's quite a ways away up
near the Saudi border, traveled
several hours, because the
hospital up near
her had been bombed.
WOMAN (through translator): As
a result of these catastrophes,
they don't have the means
to travel from their
areas, which are usually
very far from ours.
So they wait.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That was an
excerpt of "Inside Yemen," a
"Frontline" short film by Martin
Smith.
For more on the conflict and
the people caught in between,
we're joined from New York by
David Miliband.
He is president and CEO of the
International Rescue Committee,
a global aid agency, and
he served as foreign
secretary of the United
Kingdom from 2007 to 2010.
David Miliband, welcome
back to the "NewsHour."
That was a horrific film we
have just seen an excerpt of.
Tell us more about just how bad
things are right now in Yemen.
DAVID MILIBAND, President,
International Rescue
Committee: Well, I think
horrific is the right
word for the tragedy
that's unfolding in Yemen.
It is the modern face of
humanitarian catastrophe,
because Yemen represents
a political emergency,
as well as a
humanitarian emergency.
Yemen is one of four
countries threatened by
famine at the moment.
And the numbers in Yemen
are absolutely staggering,
20 million people in
humanitarian need, over
300,000 diagnosed
with cholera already.
And our teams on the
ground -- the International
Rescue Committee has
150 or 200 staff on the
ground in Yemen -- and what
they report is direct danger
to civilians from bombing as
part of the war that's going
on, and indirect danger from
the consequences of war that are
impeding access to --
of humanitarian workers
and have destroyed about
half of the hospitals
in the country.
So it really is complete
meltdown in Yemen at the moment.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, if I were
to ask you what are people --
what are the main needs that
people have, it sounds as
if you're saying everything.
DAVID MILIBAND: Yes, it is
everything, but I think one
can be specific, first of all,
that the war needs to be
conducted within the confines
of international humanitarian
law.
International humanitarian law,
which defends civilians from
attack, needs to be observed.
Secondly, the bombing
of hospitals needs to
be arrested and stopped.
Thirdly, access for humanitarian
aide workers needs to be
supported, rather than impeded.
There's a threat to
the main port in Yemen,
the Hodeidah port.
There's a threat
to bomb that port.
In fact, it needs stronger
U.N. presence there to
ensure that food is able
to enter the country,
because, obviously, the
agriculture has been completely
ruined over the last few years
of war.
And, fourthly, and critically,
there needs to be support
from the whole international
diplomatic and political,
as well as humanitarian
community for some kind
of political settlement
that can put ahold
to the fighting.
Nearly two years ago at the
United Nations, I attended a
meeting of foreign nations of
Gulf countries who said
they were committed
to finding a political
settlement, but, frankly,
it's no nearer now
than it was then.
And civilians in Yemen
are paying the price.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why has
it gotten to this point?
You describe a situation that,
by stages, has gotten to a
point, as you're describing,
it's going to be very difficult
to put this back together again.
DAVID MILIBAND: You're
absolutely right.
I mean, there are two
main reasons, I think.
First of all, the war itself
has seen a significant
upping of the ante, first
of all, by the Saudi-led
coalition, the U.S. supporting
that, then the Iranians getting
involved, then retaliation
against the Iranian involvement.
And so you see an escalation
upon escalation, neither side
willing to compromise, for fear
of losing face.
The second thing that's
been happening is
that the humanitarian
tragedy and the failure
to protect civilians and deliver
humanitarian aid has, I'm
afraid, fueled the political
emergency.
It's provided fuel
for radicalism.
It's entrenched both sides.
The bloodletting has meant that
both the Houthi rebels and the
government who have the support
of the Saudis and the
American side have got
further and further apart.
A million refugees have
left the country, including
some fleeing to Somalia.
You have got a situation
where Somalia is safer
for them than Yemen.
And those are the
two main reasons.
There is one other
thing, just to further
enlighten your audience.
Yemen is a country that
is suffering terribly
from climate change.
Sanaa is predicted to be the
first capital city in the
world to run out of water.
So you have got chronic
long-term problems and
acute problems in the
short term as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A number of
guilty parties you're talking
about, including the United
States.
What, politically, can be done?
I mean, you said a moment ago,
David Miliband, this is even
more a political crisis than
a humanitarian, as bad as it
is on a humanitarian level.
What has to be done?
DAVID MILIBAND: I think the
diplomatic and political muscle
needs to be applied to ensure
that there is a cease-fire, that
that then is built on with a
proper negotiated settlement,
because the truth is that the
current trajectory of the war
is in the interests of neither
side.
No one is winning.
But the civilians of Yemen
are losing very big time.
I'm pleased to say that
there are some senators
speaking up on this.
I was in Washington on Monday.
And there is growing concern,
I think, in the Senate to call
on the U.S. administration
to persuade the Saudis to call
a halt to this bombing campaign,
which, as I say, is fueling
the insurgency, rather than
curbing it, and to give time
for humanitarian aid to get in.
I mean, it tells you something
that we in the humanitarian
sector are desperately calling
on there to be no bombing of
the main port through which
90 percent of the food gets
into Yemen.
And Yemen is one of
four countries that are
threatened by famine.
And a unique coalition of
eight American-led NGOs
have come together to
form a global emergency
response coalition to call
on the American public to
support us in trying to staunch
the bloodshed, to staunch
the humanitarian suffering,
even while the war going on.
But it's for the diplomats
and the politicians to try
and bring the war to an end.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What's at
stake if that doesn't happen?
DAVID MILIBAND: Suffering and
further fuel for the insurgency.
This is a downward spiral
to hell that really
needs to be arrested.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Miliband
of the International Rescue
Committee, thank you very much.
DAVID MILIBAND:
Thank you very much.